ON THE ROASTING OF POTATOES

Before you do anything else, turn your oven on and start it preheating to 400ºF/200ºC. Note: your oven’s going to be running hot for a long time, this may be a shitty thing to make in the summer if your home gets really warm. Also, your gas or electricity bill will be high, this is an acceptable loss because these will change you, my friend.

What you’re going to want to start with is a good, sturdy roasting tray. Ideally this will be a ceramic-coated cast iron Le Creuset baking dish, but any other heavy metal or glass container will do. If you do not own anything suitable get out of the kitchen. Into your tray goes a good-sized glug of fat: 1/3 cup of olive or sesame oil is probably what you have on hand. If you’re feeling adventurous or are ok with throwing away any sense of cholesterol paranoia or vegetarianism then get your hands on some rendered duck fat from your butcher. O mama, potatoes fried in duck fat. Whatever kind you go with, fling it all in your tray and into the oven it goes while preheating. You want the tray, and the fat in it, screaming hot for later on.

Now, the potatoes. These get a quick boiling before hitting the oven, but like all things in life this must be done right. Fill a large pot with cold (cold!) water, a good-sized sprinkling from the ramekin of sea salt on the counter (if you don’t have a ramekin of sea salt on the counter you don’t deserve potatoes), and some dried herbs, whatever you have on hand: oregano, rosemary, thyme, paprika. Also 2 bay leaves. Put the pot on the stove and get it going fairly high. Bring to a boil and leave to a boil – the idea is to boil this herb tea for about 10 minutes to extract some of the flavours, creating a nice herb stock in situ.

While your pot is heating up, to the potatoes. You want enough food to cover the bottom of your roasting dish in a single layer; potatoes not in contact with the tray surface is a sign of abject failure. Give them a quick rinse under the tap but do not peel for the peel is central to the experience. Chop your potatoes into even-sized chunks. The actual shape and size is up to you, but uniformity is key, you want them to cook evenly at the same rate. Burned bits on some with underdone centers in others is a sign of abject failure. With a bitter-sharp knife (if you don’t have a bitter-sharp knife, get out of the kitchen) rhythmically slice and chop while occasionally swearing when your cutting board slides across your kitchen counter (note: a wet sheet of kitchen roll under your cutting board makes this go away). Chunks of potato are collected in some kind of bowl.

When your potatoes are sufficiently chunked, place your bowl under the tap and fill until the potatoes are completely surrounded by water. Give them a swirl with your hand for 30 seconds or so, notice how the water’s gone cloudy. This is the potato releasing some of its extra starch, which helps improve the creamy texture of the finished product. Drain and repeat 3 or 4 times until you notice the water staying significantly clear.

By the time you’ve finished chopping and rinsing your water should have been boiling for a sufficient amount of time and is ready to receive the potatoes. Carefully (carefully!) transfer them into the pot, a large serving spoon or spatula of some kind may come in handy. Once the potatoes are in the pot, give them a good stir for lack of anything better to do. It will take a minute or two for the water to come back up to the boil, once it boils again you have precisely 5 minutes to complete the next step. Set a timer or check your watch, do not rely on your instincts because humans are difficult, complex machines filled with blood and lose track of time easily. The potatoes must boil for 5 minutes, no more, no less.

While boiling, peel and quarter one yellow onion. If you do not have one yellow onion, two quartered shallots or one leek cut in large chunks will suffice. You will also need 4 cloves of garlic, peeled. Do not chop the garlic, but rather place each one under the flat of your knife and give it a bash with your hand, lightly crushing each clove allowing it to release more of it’s volatile compounds into the oil during roasting.

Your 5 minutes should be up. Remove potatoes from the heat and drain. Find the bay leaves, wherever they are, and chuck them in the compost. Return the potatoes to the still-hot pot but do not put back on the heat. Forget they exist, leave uncovered to steam and dry out for another 5 minutes. Afterwards… this is where the fun starts. Season with salt, pepper, and another new sprinkling of dried herbs. Add your garlic and onion to the pot as well. Now, onto the whole shebang goes 1 heaping teaspoon of white flour. On with the lid, and shake. Shake. You want to roughen the potatoes up to give them more surface area for the oven to work its’ magic. Don’t worry about hurting them, potatoes don’t feel pain. After 30 seconds or so of shaking, remove the lid and add yet a new teaspoon of flour. Re-shake again, ensuring full, uniform coating. There should be a build-up of potato gunk on the inside of your pot which is a ballache to wash out, but the sacrifice is worth it.

It is time for oven mitts. Remember, ovens are hot and can burn you. Remove the hot tray and place your tray on the stovetop. Carefully (carefully!) transfer the potato/aromatic/flour mixture into the tray. It will sizzle and snap and pop and spit hot oil like an angry, delicious cobra, so maybe long sleeves or something. Once everything is in the tray you want to give it a good toss to ensure everything is completely coated in oil and, as mentioned above, arranged in a single layer. Contact with the tray’s surface is where the crisping and browning comes from, and as we all know browning is the most direct path to flavour town. Return to the oven (night, night potatoes). You now have 15 minutes to spend with the family.

After 15 minutes has elapsed things should have started to smell quite good and it’s time for a stir. The idea is to ensure each side of each chunk spends time on the bottom, but this is a lofty goal only achieved by the most obsessive-compulsive among us. A quick toss, another small sprinkling of salt and pepper, and back in the oven it goes. Repeat this step after another 15 or 20 minutes has gone.

Once around 40 minutes of time in the oven has passed your potatoes should be nearly finished. Exact cooking time can vary based on the size of chunks, material of your tray, air flow in the oven, phase of the moon, and so on. A fork or paring knife speared into the center of a chunk, once through the now-crispy exterior, meeting little resistance all the way through is a sign of doneness. The onion should have caramelised nicely and the garlic cloves have darkened, softened, and become intensely sweet.

Remove the whole thing from the pan into a warmed serving dish. A slotted spoon can assist in making sure not too much leftover oil makes the trip to the dish. Serve immediately next to a medium-rare steak or chicken breast in mushroom pan sauce. Extra salt and pepper for those inclined to add more should be provided, and a dollop of sour cream with maybe some chives certainly wouldn’t go amiss. Red wine goes nicely.